 
1
Population Problems 
Sociology 170, Spring 2026 
Lecture Section Syllabus 
 
Instructor of Record:  Nicholas Mark  
 
 
E-mail: nmark3@wisc.edu 
 
 
 
Office:  4456 Sewell 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Hours: Tuesday 11:00 – 12:00 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Or by appointment  
 
Lecture: 
LEC 001: Tuesday/Thursday 9:55a – 10:45a, Humanities 2340 
 
 
TA Contact:  
 
Hanbi Park:  hanbi.park@wisc.edu 
Bijoyetri Samaddar: bsamaddar@wisc.edu 
 
Welcome to Sociology 170: 
The global community is currently amid a sizeable demographic transition. Over the next century, 
the global population is projected to increase from 8 to approximately 11 billion. Some countries 
will grow rapidly, while others are expected to decline in size. Over the same period in the United 
States, the median age will rise to 40, the Asian and Hispanic-origin populations will triple in size, 
and the proportion of white Americans will decline. Recently, leading population scientists have 
updated global projections and now think that global population may peak earlier and may be 
lower than previous projections. That is to say, populations are dynamic and responsive to the 
social, political, and natural world around and are worthy of ongoing and pointed study!  
This sociology (the study of people groups and their relationship and influences to and on social 
structures) course draws on materials and perspectives from the related fields of demography (the 
statistical study of populations) and epidemiology (the study of the distribution and determinants 
of health and disease in populations). We will examine how certain social phenomena—particularly 
structural inequality—influence and are reproduced by population change both globally and in the 
contemporary United States. Throughout the course, we will focus on issues that feature in current 
social science and public policy debates, including population aging, fertility and reproduction, 
immigration, and social inequalities. We’ll pay special attention to health disparities by race, 
ethnicity, and socioeconomic status.   
The goals of the course are (1) to provide students with methodological tools to understand 
population change in a systematic way, (2) to introduce the core concepts and debates in social 
demography and social epidemiology, and (3) to use these tools and concepts to (a) understand 
how population processes contribute to the production of inequality within and across generations 
and (b) examine racial and ethnic inequality in the United States and its implications for population 
health.  
Sociology Department learning objectives: 
Beyond the specific substantive and methodological content we will cover in this course, we have 
designed this course to achieve the following instructional objectives designated as priorities by the 
Department of Sociology: 

---
 
2
• 
Critically Evaluate Published Research: Students will be able to read and evaluate published 
research as it appears in academic journals and popular or policy publications 
• 
Communicate Skillfully: Students will write papers and make oral presentations that build 
arguments and assess evidence in a clear and effective manner 
• 
Critical Thinking about Society and Social Processes: Students can look beyond the surface 
of issues to discover the “why” and “how” of social order and structure and consider the 
underlying social mechanisms that may be creating a situation, identifying evidence that 
may adjudicate between alternative explanations for phenomena, and develop proposed 
policies or action plans in light of theory and data 
• 
See Things from a Global Perspective: Students learn about different cultures, groups, and 
societies through time and place. They are aware of the diversity of backgrounds and 
experiences among residents in the United States. They understand the ways events and 
processes in one community are linked to those in other communities 
 
Learning and COVID-19: 
Please do not come to class if you are sick! Students should continually monitory themselves for 
COVID-19 symptoms. Masks are welcome but not required. Please respect your fellow classmates’ 
decisions regarding mask wearing. Get tested for the virus if you have symptoms or have been in 
close contact with a COVID-19 infected person, regardless of your vaccination status. Should you 
develop any symptoms of COVID-19, or contract a positive case, please reach out to your TA as soon 
as possible to make a plan for missed classes.  
 
Classes missed due to illness are considered excused absences when the student notifies the TA 
ahead of missing class and such absences will not negatively affect your participation grade. This 
applies to all illness, not just COVID-19. Again, please do not come to class if you are sick! Rest, take 
care of yourself, and return when you are well and not contagious. 
 
 
Ethnic Studies Requirement – History and Learning Objectives:  
“The Ethnic Studies requirement is intended to increase understanding of the culture and 
contributions of persistently marginalized racial or ethnic groups in the United States, and to equip 
students to respond constructively to issues connected with our pluralistic society and global 
community. Because this increased understanding is expected to have a positive effect on campus 
climate, students are expected to complete this requirement within the first 60 credits of 
undergraduate study. 
 
Ethnic Studies Requirement Stated Learning Outcomes: Students draw connections between 
historical and present-day circumstances and consider perceptions and cultural assumptions when 
examining questions and making decisions. In courses that satisfy the Ethnic Studies requirement, 
students will: 
 
• 
articulate how the past has affected present day circumstances regarding race and racial 
inequalities in the U.S. 
• 
recognize and question cultural assumptions and knowledge claims as they relate to race and 
ethnicity 
• 
demonstrate self-awareness and empathy toward the cultural perspectives and worldviews of 
others 
• 
apply course concepts to their lives outside the classroom by respectfully participating in our 
multicultural society (UW-Madison Undergraduate Guide, 2023) 

---
 
3
 
In response to several high-profile racist incidents on the UW-Madison campus in 1987 and the 
surrounding years, numerous departments and schools like Letters & Sciences demanded 
educational responses that would expose all students to racially diverse histories and experiences. 
Over time, these demands grew into the formal Ethnic Studies requirement for all undergraduate 
students at UW-Madison. Completing Sociology 170 meets these requirements. (Learn more here.) 
 
As an educator I take this requirement and the stated learning outcomes seriously and believe in 
their importance for a well-rounded and conscientious higher educational experience, regardless of 
major track or field of study. My goal in this course is to help students across the university employ 
a sociological perspective towards race – in its historical and contemporary contexts – to help 
students learn about the structural issues underpinning racial disparities, racism, and 
discrimination in the United States.  
 
 
Accommodations and Religious Observances: 
As an educator, I aim to make sociology accessible to all students regardless of cultural and 
religious background, ability, or previous educational experience. Everybody learns differently, and 
neurodiversity is an important element in our campus community and should not be an immovable 
barrier to learning in this course. Please seek accommodations from the McBurney Center when 
appropriate, and I encourage all students to discuss with their TA any situations or emergencies 
that arise during the semester that may affect performance in the course so the instruction team 
may advocate for you when appropriate.  
 
Regarding formal accommodations through the McBurney Center, please contact your TA and 
Instructor of record, Nicholas Mark, by the end of the second week of the course if you are eligible 
for special arrangements or accommodations for testing, assignments, or other aspects of the 
course. Per campus policy, appropriate accommodations must be provided for students who qualify 
for disability services through the McBurney Center. Their website has instructions about how to 
qualify: http://www.mcburney.wisc.edu. We try to reserve rooms setup for accommodations by the 
third week of class, so we must know all accommodations by then. 
 
If you wish to request a scheduling accommodation for religious observances, send an email to your 
TA and Instructor (Nicholas Mark) by the end of the second week of the course stating the specific 
date(s) for which you request accommodation. Campus policy requires that religious observances 
be accommodated if you make a timely request early in the term, and I am happy to make these 
accommodations. See https://secfac.wisc.edu/academic-calendar/ for details.  
 
 
Civility and Communication Guidelines: 
The broad topics of this course—fertility, mortality, immigration, health, race/ethnicity, and 
poverty—contain both highly personal and highly political themes. To learn most productively, we 
must build an atmosphere of mutual respect and engagement in which all of us feel comfortable 
participating, while still fully engaging in challenging topics and conversations.  
 
Throughout our discussions, we (the teaching staff) will start out under the expectation that no one 
is intentionally raising inflammatory or inappropriate questions or comments; we ask you to do the 
same. Sometimes hurtful comments are made from genuine obliviousness, misunderstanding, or 
novice engagement with new and challenging concepts. At the same time, we recognize that there 
might be moments when someone’s questions or comments strike someone else as hurtful or 

---
 
4
deeply objectionable – with or without such intention. In such cases, we ask all of you to both 
seriously consider the other person’s point of view and standpoint, and to feel encouraged to speak 
up and respectfully call into dialogue when language is indeed personally inflammatory, offensive, 
or dehumanizing – despite the intention or lack thereof from the speaker. 
 
In short: be empathetic, strive to keep the discussion respectful, and challenge one another with 
respect and academic rigor. If you notice someone else becoming upset because of your comments, 
ask yourself why that might be the case, and think about the purpose of academic exchange. 
Remember: the idea is not to win an argument or change someone’s ideology; the idea is to come to 
a better understanding of population dynamics and their implications for the social world. 
 
Below are some guidelines suggested by me and others who teach courses with similar subject 
matter that can help us to achieve a civil and safe classroom community: 
 
• 
Criticize the idea, not the person. Especially when you disagree, remember to make the idea, 
opinion, or concept the object of your constructive critique, rather than the person who said 
it. Personal attacks, blatant sexist, racist, trans/homophobic, dehumanizing, or antagonistic 
language will not be tolerated. Be thoughtful and inquisitive and challenge one another to 
think—but do not insult, dehumanize, or disrespect each other or your teaching staff. 
• 
Learn to distinguish between factual claims and opinions. Factual claims can be checked 
against evidence. The following are both factual claims: “I had this particular experience,” 
and “my experience is typical of everyone’s experience.” However, the former is true and 
should be respected when you report it or hear it, but the latter may or may not be true, and 
can be assessed with evidence from other people and from empirical research. 
• 
Use your sociological imagination! Remember that the world is comprised of both 
individuals, and of social structures that individuals must navigate. Reassess your place in 
these social structures. Contribute to discussions that emphasize the connections among 
history, social structure, and personal biography. 
• 
Be sensitive to minority/majority dynamics. Be mindful of your own positionality – or, your 
unique history, identity, and social experience of life – compared to others. People who are 
members of racial/ethnic minoritized groups, minoritized sexual or gender identities, or 
people who hold minority political opinions or cultural values can feel particularly 
vulnerable in some contexts. Please be aware of this during discissions and when you speak.  
• 
Communicate with your TA. Approach them after class, make an appointment, or send an 
email if when you feel uncomfortable or very strongly about an event or discussion relevant 
to class. Please let your TA know if you are worried about class dynamics. 
• 
Take permission to be unpolished - this is a learning space and a practice space. Expect 
unfinished business and discussions that lack a coherent conclusion. We are all on a 
learning curve here! But! Do not confuse being unpolished with being rude, inflammatory, 
or dehumanizing.  
• 
Hold opinions lightly and with humility and come to the conversation with a willingness to 
be challenged and to learn. 
• 
Keep others' stories confidential, while taking the important lesson of the story with you. 
• 
Provide feedback with curiosity (“How would you...?”, “What do you think of...?”, “Would it 
be helpful for me to…?”) as opposed to belittlement or dismissal.  
 
Office Hours: 
Office hours with your TA are the ideal time to get one-on-one attention and work out any issues 
you’re having with the material from lecture or discussion section. Attend office hours with your TA 

---
 
5
if you have a question about course material, missed a discussion section or lecture and you are not 
grasping the material on your own, or need extra help with assignments or study techniques. Please 
send your TA a brief email before you attend office hours that describes the issue or question you 
are having, and come prepared with the necessary readings or notes. 
 
I hold regular office hours every week for students. Regarding the course, I am happy to talk to you 
about any sources of confusion, challenges you might be having, or to delve deeper into some of the 
issues we will discuss this semester. Additionally, I am happy to be a resource as you navigate the 
university setting or have questions about academia, graduate school, the job market, etc. For many 
of you, the university setting is a new experience, and it can be overwhelming. It certainly was for 
me! 
 
Drop ins are welcome and usually not busy, but if you want to guarantee time to chat, please 
schedule an appointment with me via email.  Hours and links in Canvas or the top of the syllabus. 
 
While I prefer not to, if the scheduled office hours do not fit your schedule, we can meet outside of 
office hours on an as-needed basis.  
 
Communication with your TA and instructor: 
Due to the large size of this course, please adhere to the following procedure: 
• 
If you have questions or concerns related to grading, assignments, administration, or course 
content, always check the course website and syllabus first. 
• 
If you can’t find what you need there, contact your TA next. 
• 
If issues remain, come to my virtual office hours—there’s no appointment needed. You can 
also always talk to me after lecture. 
• 
If a schedule conflict prevents you from talking with me after lecture or during office hours, 
email nmark3@wisc.edu to set up an appointment for another time. These emails must 
contain “170” in the title; otherwise they are at risk of being filed into spam. 
Your TA and I try to respond to student emails in a timely manner (usually within 2 business days, 
barring any unusual circumstances) and during business hours. I typically do not check email 
regularly on weekends, so I will address emails sent late Friday evenings on Monday mornings. I 
will try to check and address any emails on Friday afternoon before I shut down my computer. 
Please avoid sending last-minute messages, as I may not be able to respond to them in time. For an 
appointment outside of office hours, please allow for at least a 48-hour notice, as my weekly 
schedule is quite tight. 
 
** Please consult your syllabi and Canvas before emailing about assignments, due dates, or other 
course material and requirements. Most questions have been addressed in the syllabus. ** 
 
Email Etiquette: In all of your emails to teaching staff, please include “SOC170-30x” in the 
subject line and include your full name in the body or signature. I try to respond to all 
emails within two business days, but if I fail to, please do not hesitate to “bump” your email 
to the top of my inbox by replying to your original email with a gentle reminder. If I am 
indeed late in responding to you, this action is not rude, but rather helps when my inbox 
becomes unruly. Email is a professional communication tool, so please use it as such by 
keeping communication professional and related to the course or office hours. Consult this 
website that has helpful advice for emailing professors and TAs: www.wikihow.com/Email-
a-Professor. 

---
 
6
 
Evaluation and Grading: 
There are four major components to the course: 1) discussion attendance and quality participation; 
2) written assignments, 3) exams, and 4) In-class responses.  
 
(1) Attendance (10%) & Quality Participation (10%): Attendance is mandatory. Your TA will take 
attendance each week. You may miss one discussion section unexcused with no effect to your 
grade. More than one unexcused absence will lower your attendance and participation grade. It is 
your responsibility to make up all missed work; be sure to obtain any handouts distributed in class 
and borrow notes from classmates. Excused absences include illnesses, university-approved travel, 
emergencies, and other extreme cases. The best way to avoid an unexcused absence is to 
communicate ahead of time! Your TA will be reasonable and accommodating when possible and 
appropriate. 
 
High quality participation will meet the civility guidelines mentioned above and agreed upon, will 
be grounded in the class readings, will demonstrate a strong command of the course material, and 
will help facilitate meaningful course discussion. You are required to demonstrate that you have 
been mindful of the lectures and readings. I encourage you to try in contributing thoughtful, 
relevant classroom participation that elevates the classroom discussion.  
 
Participation comes in many forms and your evaluation is not based solely on how much you speak 
and if your answers are correct. Rather, good participation is about using your unique skills, 
experience, and insight to help create meaningful academic exchange. This can mean speaking up 
when you have an insight, helping to ask clarifying and enriching questions of your classmates, and 
redirecting conversation to the agreed upon source material. It can also mean listening intently to 
your small group discussions and reporting accurately the conclusions, stepping back to allow 
others to speak when you know you have been dominating a conversation, and exercising courage 
to speak up with a pointed insight despite the discomfort of speaking aloud. Discussion section is 
about learning the course material, and becoming comfortable with elocuting the course ideas in 
everyday interaction.  
 
Students are evaluated on two points as it relates to participation:  
 
1) Preparation and content command: how prepared students are for discussion and how 
relevant their substantive contributions are to the conversation.  
a. High scoring students will demonstrate a clear reading and grasp of the course 
material (readings and lecture content); draw discussion points from course 
material and empirical evidence; ask clarifying and enriching questions to deepen 
course discussion points; tie course material to previous course ideas, topics, and 
themes; practice humility and acknowledge when they do not understand a topic, 
idea, or theme. 
b. Low scoring students will demonstrate poor class preparation by not completing 
readings or attending lectures; offer discussion points that are not relevant to the 
course or rooted in course content; change topics frequently or avoid answering 
discussion prompts; fabricate or improvise answers or discussion points despite 
understanding of the topic and lack of grounding in course material.  
 
2) Creating a meaningful classroom experience: how well students engage in classroom 
discussion and facilitate meaningful academic exchange. 

---
 
7
a. High scoring students may regularly step back to give space for others to speak after 
speaking; exercise courage in speaking up in small or large group discussions 
despite the discomfort of speaking aloud; notice their own preconceived ideas about 
course material and reflect in person or aloud on how the course material relates; 
ask follow-up questions to allow others to complete their thoughts or expand on 
good ideas or comments; show grace to other students who are practicing their 
public speaking skills.  
b. Low scoring students may speak too frequently and prevent others from expressing 
their ideas; sit idle and not engage in any small or large group class conversation; be 
dismissive of the course concepts and ideas, or the ideas of their peers, outright 
without any consideration; ask disrespectful or “gotcha” questions to their peers for 
the sake of winning an argument or proving a point; belittle or scoff at students who 
are less practices as speaking the course material aloud.  
 
Note: For all students: Participation scores will also be lowered at the TA’s discretion for 
students who are an active distraction from the class discussion, including but not limited to 
off-topic multitasking, belittling the contribution of other students, and actions that create a 
hostile classroom environment and violate the community discussion guidelines established 
by the class. 
 
(2) Written assignments (20%): There will be two short writing assignments that will require you 
to connect class material to current events via the analysis of current news stories. The purpose of 
these assignments is for you to draw a clear connection between theoretical concepts and material 
reality. An additional handout will explain these assignments in more detail. The two written 
assignments will together represent 20% of your grade in the course. 
 
(3) Exams – combined (45%): There will be two exams in the course. Taken together, material and 
handouts covered in discussion sections, lecture, and written assignments will aim to prepare you 
for the exams in this course. More details on the exam format during lecture. Lectures will NOT be 
recorded or posted online, so attending lectures is of the utmost importance. If you miss an exam, 
you will have 2 business days to make it up. Make up exams will be a written essay. Your exam 
grade in this course will be based on the following components:  
 
Exam 1 (3/3/2026): In class (20% of total grade, covers Topics 1-2) 
Exam 2 (4/30/2026): In class (25% of total grade, covers Topics 3-4) 
 
(4) In-class Quizzes (15%): There will be 24 quizzes, corresponding to the 23 substantive lectures 
this semester plus a syllabus quiz. Quizzes will be in class, and will cover questions from the 
readings and/or lecture. 1-3 questions will be displayed on the board, and they may be multiple 
choice or short answer. They will take less than 5 minutes. Because I understand that things happen 
and you may have to miss lecture for some reason, 3 quizzes won’t count toward your grade.  Your 
score will thus be made up of your top 20 quiz grades, plus the syllabus quiz.  
 
Course grades will be assigned in accordance with the UW undergraduate grade policy, using the 
following point distribution: 
 
A: 93-100  AB: 87-92.99  B:83-86.99  BC: 77-82.99  C: 70-76.99  D: 60-69.99  F: 0-59.99 
 
You may contest specific exam and assignment grades up to two weeks after the exams and 
assignments have been returned. Raise minor issues (e.g. computational errors in your score, 

---
 
8
clarifications on points deducted) with your TA. Any substantive concerns about the contents of 
your answer or petitions to change an assignment grade should be discussed with the professor. 
Requests to re-grade assignments after final grades are submitted cannot be honored, per 
university policy. 
 
 
Privacy, Yours and Mine: 
You may not record any discussion or lecture sessions without written consent from your 
instructor AND your TA. This is extremely important! As a learning community, trust is critical for 
fostering a place that we can engage in growth, self-reflection, and effective learning. Unauthorized 
recording of lecture content or discussion sections violates this trust and is a violation of federal 
law, as the privacy of your contributions and your classmates’ contributions to lecture and 
discussion sections are protected by federal law.  
• 
Lectures and discussion materials and recordings for Sociology 170 are protected 
intellectual property at UW-Madison.  
• 
Students in this course may use the materials and recordings provided on Canvas for their 
personal use related to participation in this class. Students may also take notes solely for 
their personal use.  
• 
If a lecture or discussion is not already recorded, you are not authorized to record either 
without the professor and TAs permission unless you are considered by the university to be 
a qualified student with a disability requiring accommodation. [Regent Policy Document 4-
1]  
• 
Students may not copy or have discussion recordings outside of class, including posting on 
internet sites or selling to commercial entities.  
• 
Students are also prohibited from providing or selling their personal notes to anyone else or 
being paid for taking notes by any person or commercial firm without the instructor’s 
express written permission.  
• 
Unauthorized use of these copyrighted lecture materials and recordings constitutes 
copyright infringement and may be addressed under the university’s policies, UWS 
Chapters 14 and 17, governing student academic and non-academic misconduct. 
 
Academic Integrity, Departmental notice of grievances and appeal rights: 
In your exams, quizzes, and written assignments, you are expected to exercise academic honesty 
and integrity. According to UWS 14, academic misconduct occurs when a student: 
• 
Seeks to claim credit for the work or efforts of another without authorization or citation 
• 
Uses unauthorized materials or fabricated data in any academic exercise 
• 
Forges or falsifies academic documents or records 
• 
Intentionally impedes or damages the academic work of others 
• 
Engages in conduct aimed at making false representation of […] academic performance 
• 
Assists other students in any of these acts 
Cheating, plagiarism, or any other breach of academic integrity on an assignment in this course will 
result in an automatic failing grade of 0 for the exam or assignment in question, and a submission of 
written reports to your college dean and the dean of students. Those administrators may (at their 
discretion) take further disciplinary action. Please note that lack of familiarity with policies will not 
excuse failure to comply with them. 
 
The university’s Writing Center has an excellent webpage about how to successfully quote and 
paraphrase texts: http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/QuotingSources.html. See also these 

---
 
9
guidelines about avoiding plagiarism: http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/QPA_plagiarism.html. 
Please make every effort to avoid such issues in your section writing assignments. 
 
Departmental Notice of Grievance Procedure: 
The Department of Sociology regularly conducts student evaluations of all professors and teaching 
assistants near the end of the semester. Students who have more immediate concerns about this 
course should report them to the instructor or to the chair, 8128 Social Science 
(egrodsky@ssc.wisc.edu). 
 

---
 
10
PART ONE: POPULATION FRAMEWORKS 
January 20 (Tuesday): 
Lecture #1.1 – Introduction, Population Thinking 
Max Roser and Hannah Ritchie (2023) - "How has world population growth changed over 
time?". Published online at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from: 
'https://ourworldindata.org/population-growth-over-time' 
Preston, S.H., P. Heuveline, and M. Guillot. (2001). Demography: Measuring and modeling 
population processes. UK, Blackwell Publishers. Pp. 1-8, 16-20 
January 22 (Thursday):  
Lecture #1.2 – Periods, Cohorts, and Population Structure 
 
Ritchie and Roser. (2019) Age structure. Our World in Data.   
Rogers, Luke T. (2016). America’s Age Profile Told through Population Pyramids. US Census 
Bureau 
Recommended: 
 https://worldpopulationreview.com/us-cities/madison-wi-population (Madison 
Population pyramid) 
(Discussion Session):  
Make Introductions and Set Community Guidelines; Discuss Lecture 1.1/1.2- – Population Thinking 
 
January 27 (Tuesday): 
Lecture #1.3 – How do we know what we know about populations?  
Sullivan, Theresa. (2020) “Coming to our census: How social statistics underpin our 
democracy.” Harvard Data Science Review. Focus on sections 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 10 
 
How the US Census misses people of color - and why it is so harmful. The Guardian, 
February 2020. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2020/feb/27/2020-us-
census-black-people-mistakes-count 
Recommended: 
Giattino et al. (2021). “Excess mortality during the Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19).” 
https://ourworldindata.org/excess-mortality-covid  
January 29 (Thursday):  
Lecture #1.4 – Demographic Transitions  
Roser, Max. (2019) Demographic transition: Why is rapid population growth a temporary 
phenomenon? Published online at OurWorldinData.org. 
https://ourworldindata.org/demographic-transition 

---
 
11
Lesthaeghe, R. (2014). The second demographic transition: A concise overview of its 
development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(51), 18112-18115. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1420441111  (4 pages) 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss Lecture 1.3-1.4 
 
February 3 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #1.5 – Malthusians and neo-Malthusians vs. … Elon Musk?  
Bell, Michael. (2004) “Population and Development.” An Invitation to Environmental 
Sociology. pp. 78-99. 
NY Times Video (2015). The population bomb? 
Reynolds, Matt. (2022) “Elon Musk is Totally Wrong About Population Collapse.” Wired.  
 
February 5 (Thursday):  
Lecture #1.6 – Does population growth threaten the environment? 
Stephenson, Judith, Karen Newman, and Susannah Mayhew. (2010). Population dynamics 
and climate change: what are the links? Journal of Public Health. 32(2): 150-156.  
Rosling, H. (2010). The magic washing machine. TED Video (9:16) 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 1.5-1.6  
 
February 10 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #1.7 – Fewer babies, or later babies? 
Marinus J.C. Eijkemans et al. (2014) Too old to have children? Lessons from natural fertility 
populations. Human Reproduction, Volume 29, Issue 6, Pages 1304-1312 
https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deu056 
Livingston, Gretchen. (2019) Is U.S. fertility at an all-time low? Two of three measures point 
to yes. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2019/05/22/u-s-
fertility-rate-explained/ 
February 12 (Thursday):  
Lecture #1.8 – Family planning and “Unmet need” 
Bongaarts, John (2014) The Impact of Family Planning Programs on Unmet Need and 
Demand for Family Planning. Studies in Family Planning. Focus on pp. 247-252 

---
 
12
Sedgh, Gilda, Lori Ashford, and Rubina Hussein. (2016) Reasons Women Cite for Not Using 
Contraception. Unmet Need for Contraception in Developing Countries: Examining 
Women’s Reasons for Not Using a Method. Pp. 26-30. 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lecture 1.7-1.8 
 
February 17 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #1.9 – How low is U.S. Fertility? 
Gietel-Basten, Stuart. (2016) Why national fertility campaigns are unlikely to make people 
have more children. The Conversation. 
Hartnett, C.S. (2019) U.S. Fertility keeps dropping but that’s not a reason to panic. The 
Conversation.  
Hartnett, C.S. and Gemmil, A. (2020) Recent Trends in U.S. Childbearing Intentions. 
Demography. 57(6) 2035-2045. 
Feb 18 (Wednesday) – Writing Assignment #1 Due on Canvas, 11:59PM 
 
PART TWO: POPULATION AGING AND HEALTH 
 
February 19: (Thursday)  
Lecture #2.1 – What is Life Expectancy, and what does it tell us about population health? 
Eisenstein, Michael. (2022) Does human lifespan have a limit? Nature. 601:82-84. 
Oeppen, J. and J. Vaupel. (2002) Broken limits to life expectancy. Science. 296: 1029-1031 
 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 1.9-2.1  
February 24 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #2.2 – Is population aging a problem? 
Scott, Andrew. (2018) The myth of the aging society. World Economic Forum 
Rogerson, P. (2018) America’s graying population in 3 maps. The Conversation. May 23, 
2018 
 

---
 
13
February 26 (Thursday):  
 
Lecture #2.3 – Life Expectancy and Social Policy 
Case, A. and A. Deaton. (2021). Life expectancy in adulthood is falling for those without a BA 
degree, but as educational gaps have widened, racial gaps have narrowed. PNAS 118(11) 
e2024777118 (6 pages) 
Why do Americans die earlier than Europeans? | Samuel Preston and Yana Vierboom | The 
Guardian 
 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 2.2-2.3, Exam Review 
 
March 3 9:55-10:45 EXAM 1: Covers content (lectures, readings, discussion) from Part I and Part II 
 
PART THREE: RACE AND HEALTH INEQUALITY 
March 5 (Thursday): 
Lecture #3.1 – How do Americans think about race? 
Morning, Ann. (2017) “Kaleidoscope: contested identities and new forms of race 
membership.” Ethnic and Racial Studies. (Focus on pp. 4-9, 13-15) 
Did The U.S. White Population Decline And Shrink? It's Complicated : NPR 
Vox. "The Myth of Race." 3 minute video. 
PBS. “What are you” What I hear when you say video (6 minutes 39 seconds) 
PBS. “Model minority” What I hear when you say video (7 minutes 7 seconds) 
NY Times. “A Conversation with Native Americans about Race” video (6 minutes 23 
seconds) 
 
(Discussion Session):  
Exam Review and Discuss lecture 3.1  
 
March 10 (Tuesday): 
Lecture #3.2 – How do social structures reproduce racial inequality? 

---
 
14
Pager D, Shepherd H. The Sociology of Discrimination: Racial Discrimination in 
Employment, Housing, Credit, and Consumer Markets. Annu Rev Sociol. 2008 Jan 1;34:181-
209. doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.33.040406.131740. PMID: 20689680; PMCID: PMC2915460. 
March 12 (Thursday):  
Lecture #3.3 – Why does residential segregation persist? 
Joe LaBriola, Housing Market Appreciation and the White-Black Wealth Gap, Social 
Problems, Volume 72, Issue 4, November 2025, Pages 1473–
1491, https://doi.org/10.1093/socpro/spae030 Read the Abstract, Introduction, and 
Conclusion 
Adam Ruins Everything. “The Disturbing History of the Suburbs” video (6 minutes 19 
seconds) 
Barry-Jester, A. (2016). How Americans Die May Depend on Where They Live. 
FiveThirtyEight 
 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 3.2-3.3 
 
March 17 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #3.4 –How does mass incarceration contribute to inequality? 
Petit, B. and C. Gutierrez. (2018) Mass incarceration and racial inequality. American Journal of 
Economics and Sociology. 77(3-4): 1153-1182, focus on the 2nd-9th pages 
The Atlantic. (2015) Mass Incarceration, Visualized. Video 
March 19 (Thursday):  
Lecture #3.5 – What do structural racism and discrimination have to do with health? 
Phelan, J. C., & Link, B. G. (2015). Is Racism a Fundamental Cause of Inequalities in 
Health? Annual Review of Sociology, 41(1), 311–330. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-073014-112305 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 3.4-3.5  
 
 

---
 
15
March 24 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #3.6 – How do racial inequalities in health operate across the life course? 
Goosby, Bridget and Chelsea Heidbrink. (2013) The Transgenerational Consequences of 
Discrimination on African-American Health Outcomes. Sociology Compass pp. 636-640 
Geronimus, A.T., et al. (2016) “Weathering” and age patterns of allostatic load scores among 
blacks and whites in the United States. AJPH 96(5): 826-833 
March 25 (Wednesday) – Writing Assignment #2 Due on Canvas, 11:59PM 
March 26 (Thursday):  
Lecture #3.7 – How do interpersonal and institutional racism affect reproduction? 
 
Roberts, Dorothy (2015) “Reproductive Justice, Not Just Rights.” Dissent. 62(4): 79-82 
Claire Cain Miller. (2023) Childbirth Is Deadlier for Black Families Even When They’re Rich, 
Expansive Study Finds. New York Times. February 12, 2023 
 
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lectures 3.6-3.7  
NO CLASS – SPRING BREAK 
 
PART FOUR: MIGRATION 
April 7 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #4.1 – Why do people migrate? 
Massey, D.S., J. Durand, and N. Malone. (2002) Beyond Smoke and Mirrors Ch 2 
 
April 9 (Thursday):  
Lecture #4.2 – How have ideas about race shaped immigration and the racialization of immigrants? 
 
Vargas, Valle, and Dhuman. (2025) Unraveling Complexities of Latino Racialization. Annual 
Review of Sociology. pp 1-5, 12-15 
Brown, Hana E., Jennifer A. Jones, and Andrea Becker. 2018. “The Racialization of Latino 
Immigrants in New Destinations: Criminality, Ascription, and Countermobilization.” RSF: The 
Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 4(5): 118–40. DOI: 
10.7758/RSF.2018.4.5.06.  
(Discussion Session):  
Discuss lecture 4.1 – 4.2 
 
 

---
 
16
April 14 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #4.3 – Theories of immigrant incorporation  
Zhou, Min and Roberto Gonzales (2019) Divergent Destinies: Children of Immigrants 
Growing Up in the United States. Annual Review of Sociology. Pp. 383-389 
April 16 (Thursday):  
Lecture #4.4 – How is the composition of America changing? 
Lichter, D. T., & Johnson, K. M. (2020). A Demographic Lifeline? Immigration and Hispanic 
Population Growth in Rural America. Population Research and Policy Review, 1-19. 
Zhou, Min and Roberto Gonzales (2019) Divergent Destinies: Children of Immigrants 
Growing Up in the United States. Annual Review of Sociology pp. 390-395. 
 
Discuss lecture 4.3 - 4.5 
 
April 21 (Tuesday):  
Lecture #4.3 – Immigration Policy in 2026   
http://res.dallasnews.com/interactives/migrantroute/  
Readings TBD 
 
April 23 (Thursday): NO CLASS  
 
 
April 28 (Tuesday): 
Exam Review 
 
April 30 9:55-10:45 – EXAM 2: Covers content (lectures, readings, discussion) from Part III and IV 
 

---
